# Well-Architected Framework

Introductie:
De Cloud Providers hebben er baat bij dat hun klanten goede, veilige applicaties op de infrastructuur van de provider draaien. Om klanten een leidraad te geven hoe een goede, veilige applicatie eruit ziet is het Well-Architected Framework in het leven geroepen.

Het Well-Architected Framework van Azure en AWS lijken veel op elkaar. Ze zijn gebaseerd op bijna dezelfde ‘pilaren’, namelijk:
* Cost Optimization
* Reliability
* Operational Excellence
* Performance Efficiency 
* Security 

Een ezelsbruggetje om deze pilaren te kunnen onthouden is ook wel CROPS.

Elke pilaar gaat in op een aspect van je applicatie, en hoe de Cloud kan helpen deze te optimaliseren.

Jij, als cloud engineer, moet met deze Well-Architected Framework een applicatie kunnen bouwen die optimaal gebruik maakt van de mogelijkheden in de Cloud.


## Key-terms
| **Pijler**                  | **Beschrijving**                                                                            |
|-----------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Betrouwbaarheid             | Het vermogen van een systeem om te herstellen van fouten en te kunnen blijven functioneren. |
| Beveiliging                 | Toepassingen en gegevens beveiligen tegen bedreigingen.                                     |
| Kostenoptimalisatie         | Kosten beheren om de geleverde waarde te maximaliseren.                                     |
| Operationele uitmuntendheid | Operationele processen die ervoor zorgen dat een systeem blijft werken.                     |
| Prestatie-efficiëntie       | Het vermogen van een systeem om zich aan te passen aan wijzigingen in de belasting.         |


## Opdracht

Bestudeer:
* Well-Architected Framework van Azure
* Hoe je elke pilaar kan implementeren met cloud-diensten 

**Cost Optimization:**

[Documentatie over Cost Optimization](https://learn.microsoft.com/nl-nl/azure/well-architected/cost/)

---------------------
Cost Optimization stages:  
Design -> Provision -> Monitor -> Optimize

Increase cost awareness:
* Budgets
* Alerts
* Tagging

Eliminate Cloud Waste:
* Shutdown unused resources
* Right-size underutilized resources
* Autoscaling and Autoshutdown  

Take advantage of offers:
* Hybrid benefits
* Reservations

Modernize architecture:
* Explore PAAS and serverless
---------------------

[Cost Optimization Principles:](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/well-architected/cost/principles)  

* Set up budgets and maintain cost constraints
* Dynamically allocate and deallocate resources;
    * Reconfigure
    * Consolidate (or)
    * Shut down
* Optimize workloads, aim for scalable costs;   
    * Consider usage metrics and performance to determine the number of instances.
    * Choose smaller instances for a highly variable workload.
    * Scale out, rather than up, to get the required level of performance. This choice enables you to make your cost calculations and estimates granular
* Continuously monitor and optimize cost management;
    * Conduct regular cost reviews
    * Measure capacity needs
    * Forecast capacity needs

[Checklist - Design for cost](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/well-architected/cost/design-checklist:)  

* Cost model:  
    * Capture clear requirements    
    * Estimate the initial cost    
    * Define policies for the cost constraints defined by the organization
    * Identify shared assets  
    * Plan a governance strategy  


* Architecture  
    * Check the cost of resources in various Azure geographic regions  
    * Choose a subscription that is appropriate for the workload.  
    * Choose the right resources to handle the performance.  
    * Compare consumption-based pricing with pre-provisioned cost.  
    * Use proof-of-concept deployments.  
    * Choose managed services when possible. 

**Reliability:**

[Documentation about reliability](https://learn.microsoft.com/nl-nl/azure/well-architected/resiliency/)

Ontwerpprincipes:   
Ontwerp voor *zakelijke vereisten*; welk betrouwbaarheidsniveau is bedrijfskritiek? (SLA 99.9999% ?) Hoe hoger de gewenste betrouwbaarheid/beschikbaarheid, hoe hoger de kosten.    
Accepteer dat *fouten* onvermijdelijk zijn, ontwerp dus zodanig dat hierop zo goed mogelijk kan worden geanticipeerd.  
Zorg voor *observatie* waardoor problemen kunnen worden gedecteerd, voorspeld en hersteld.  
Dmv *automatisering* worden menselijke fouten beperkt.   
Met *zelfherstel* kan een systeem automatisch fouten op lossen. (Herstelprotocollen maken verbinding met foutmodi.)  
Met *autoscaling* kan een systeem anticiperen op toename van verkeer.

Betrouwbare toepassingen moeten een vooraf gedefinieerd percentage van uptime (beschikbaarheid) behouden. Ze moeten ook een balans vinden tussen hoge tolerantie, lage latentie en kosten (hoge beschikbaarheid). Net zo belangrijk is dat toepassingen moeten kunnen herstellen van fouten (tolerantie).

Meer over [ontwerpen voor betrouwbaarheid](https://learn.microsoft.com/nl-nl/azure/well-architected/resiliency/design-checklist)

**Operational Excellence**

[Documentation about Operational Excellence](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/well-architected/devops/)  

-----
To achieve a higher competency in operations, consider and improve how software is:

* Developed
* Deployed
* Operated
* Maintained

Equally important, provide a team culture, which includes:

* Experimentation and growth
* Solutions for rationalizing the current state of operations
* Incident response plans
-----

[Operational Excellence Principles:](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/well-architected/devops/principles)  

<details>
<summary>Optimize build and release processes</summary>

Embrace software engineering disciplines across your entire environment, which include the following disciplines:

* Provision with Infrastructure as Code
* Build and release with continuous integration and continuous delivery (CI/CD) pipelines
* Use automated testing methods
* Avoid configuration drift through configuration as code  

This approach ensures the creation and management of environments throughout the software development lifecycle. It enables:

* Consistency
* Repetition
* Early detection of issues

</details>

<details>
<summary>
Understand operational health</summary>

Implement systems and processes to monitor all aspects of your workload. Including:

* Build and release processes
* Infrastructure health
* Application health

Robust monitoring ensures the observability of a workload and allows you to correlate events and take proactive mitigating issues.

In addition, customer data is critical to understanding the health of a workload and whether the service is meeting the business goals.
</details>

<details>

<summary>Rehearse recovery and practice failure</summary>
Rehearse recovery and practice failure using the following methods:

* Run disaster recovery (DR) drills on a regular cadence.
* Use chaos engineering practices to identify and remediate weak points in application reliability.
* Rehearse failure to validate the effectiveness of recovery processes and ensure teams are familiar with their responsibilities.
* Document past failures and automate their remediation where possible.

</details>

<details>
<summary>Embrace continuous operational improvement</summary>

Teams that embrace continuous operational improvement continuously evaluate and refine operational procedures and tasks. They strive to reduce complexity and ambiguity whenever possible.

Adopting a continuous improvement culture helps organizations:

* Evolve processes over time.
* Optimize inefficiencies and associated processes.
* Learn from failures.
* Continuously evaluate new opportunities.

</details>

<details>
<summary>Use loosely coupled architecture</summary>
Use modern architecture patterns such as:

* microservices
* loosely coupled
* serverless  

and pair this with cloud design patterns such as:

* Circuit breakers
* Load-Leveling
* Throttling  

and advanced deployment strategies like:
<details>
<summary>* Canary</summary>
Canary deployment is a strategy where a new version of an application is deployed to a small subset of users or servers, allowing for testing and monitoring of the new version in a real-world environment before rolling it out to the entire system. This allows for early detection of potential issues and reduces the risk of a system-wide failure. If the canary deployment is successful, the new version can then be gradually rolled out to the rest of the system. This strategy is useful when rolling out major updates to an application, or when deploying critical infrastructure changes.
</details>
<details>
<summary>* Blue-green  </summary>
Blue-green deployment is a strategy where two identical environments, one running the current version of the application (blue) and the other running the new version (green), are set up side-by-side. Traffic is then gradually routed from the blue environment to the green environment until all traffic is directed to the green environment. If any issues arise during the deployment process, traffic can be easily redirected back to the blue environment. This strategy is useful when deploying large, complex applications or when making infrastructure changes that require downtime.
</details>
<details>
<summary>* Staggered</summary>
Staggered deployment, also known as rolling deployment, is a strategy where a new version of an application is deployed incrementally across the system in a controlled and sequential manner. A small percentage of servers are updated at a time, and the deployment process is monitored closely for issues. If any issues are detected, the deployment can be halted and rolled back. This strategy is useful when rolling out minor updates to an application or when making infrastructure changes that require minimal downtime.
</details>

to enable teams to build and deploy services independently and minimize the impact if there is a service failure.

This principle also extends to procedural decoupling. Teams will be able to take full advantage of their loosely coupled architecture if they do not have to depend on partner teams to support, approve, or operate their workloads.
</details>

**Performance efficiency**

[Documentation about Performance efficiency](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/well-architected/scalability/)

[Performance efficiency Principles](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/well-architected/scalability/principles)  

Performance efficiency is the ability of your workload to adjust to changes in demands placed on it by users in an efficient manner. These principles are intended to guide you in your overall strategy for improving performance efficiency.

<details>
<summary>Design for horizontal scaling</summary>

*Horizontal scaling allows for elasticity.* Instances are added (scale-out) or removed (scale-in) in response to changes in load. Scaling out can improve resiliency by building redundancy. Scaling in can help reduce costs by shutting down excess capacity.
| Approach                                                       | Benefit                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
|----------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Define a capacity model according to the business requirements | Test the limits for predicted and random spikes and fluctuations in load to make sure the application can scale. Factor in the SKU service limits and regional limits so that application scales as expected if there's a regional failure. |
| Use PaaS offerings                                             | Take advantage of the built-in capabilities that automatically trigger scaling operations instead of investing in manual scaling efforts that often require custom implementations and can be error prone.                                  |
| Choose the right resources and right-size                      | Determine if the resources can support the anticipated load. Also, justify the cost implications of the choices.                                                                                                                            |
| Apply strategies in your design early                          | Accelerate adoption without significant changes. For example, strive for stateless application and store state externally in a database or distributed cache. Use caching where possible, to minimize the processing load.                  |

An alternate approach is vertical scaling (scale up). However, you eventually may reach a limit where there isn't a larger system, and you can't scale up anymore. At that point, any further scaling must be horizontal. So it's good practice to employ a scale-out architecture early on.

</details>

<details>
<summary>Shift-left on performance testing</summary>

*Test early and test often to catch issues early.*
| Approach                                                        | Benefit                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Run load and stress tests                                       | Measure the application's performance under predetermined amounts of load and also the maximum load your application and its infrastructure can withstand.                                                                                                                                   |
| Establish performance baselines                                 | Determine the current efficiency of the application and its supporting infrastructure. You'll be able to identify bottlenecks early before it worsens with load. Also, this strategy can lead to strategies for improvements and determine if the application is meeting the business goals. |
| Run the test in the continuous integration (CI) build pipeline. | Detect issues early. Any development effort must go through continuous performance testing to make sure changes to the codebase doesn't negatively affect performance.                                                                                                                       |
</details>

<details>
<summary>Continuously monitor for performance in production</summary>

*Observe the system holistically to evaluate the overall health of the solution.* Capture the test results not only in dev/test environment but also in production. Monitoring and logging in production can help identify bottlenecks and opportunities for improvement.

| Approach                                          | Benefit                                                                                                                                                               |
|---------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Monitor the health of the entire solution         | Know about the scalability and resiliency of the infrastructure, application, and dependent services. Gather and review key performance counters regularly.           |
| Capture data from repeatable processes            | Evaluate the metrics over time that would allow for autoscaling with demand. For reliability, look for early warning signs that might require proactive intervention. |
| Reevaluate the needs of the workload continuously | Identify improvement opportunities with resolution planning. This effort may require updated configurations and deprecations in favor of more-appropriate solutions.  |

[Use this checklist to review your application architecture from a performance design standpoint](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/well-architected/scalability/design-checklist)

</details>  

**Security**

[Security Documentation](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/well-architected/security/)

[Overview](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/well-architected/security/overview)

[Principles](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/well-architected/security/security-principles)

<details>
<summary>Plan resources and how to harden them</summary>
Recommendations:

* Consider security when planning workload resources.
* Understand how individual cloud services are protected.
* Use a service enablement framework to evaluate.
</details>

<details>
<summary>Automate and use least privilege</summary>

Recommendations:

* Implement least privilege throughout the application and control plane to protect against data exfiltration and malicious actor scenarios.
* Drive automation through DevSecOps to minimize the need for human interaction.
</details>

<details>
<summary>Classify and encrypt data</summary>

Recommendations:

* Classify data according to risk.
* Apply industry-standard encryption at rest and in transit, which ensures keys and certificates are stored securely and managed properly.
</details>

<details>
<summary>Monitor system security, plan incident response</summary>

Recommendations:

* Correlate security and audit events to model application health.
* Correlate security and audit events to identify active threats.
* Establish automated and manual procedures to respond to incidents.
* Use security information and event management (SIEM) tooling for tracking.

</details>

<details>
<summary>Identify and protect endpoints</summary>

Recommendations:

* Monitor and protect the network integrity of internal and external endpoints through security appliances or Azure services, such as:
    * Firewalls
    * Web application firewalls
* Use industry standard approaches to protect against common attack vectors, such as distributed denial of service (DDoS) attacks like SlowLoris.

</details>

<details>
<summary>Protect against code-level vulnerabilities</summary>

Recommendations:

* Identify and mitigate code-level vulnerabilities, such as cross-site scripting and structured query language (SQL) injection.
* In the operational lifecycle, regularly incorporate:
    * Security fixes
    * Codebase and dependency patching

</details>

<details>
<summary>Model and test against potential threats</summary>

Recommendations:

* Establish procedures to identify and mitigate known threats.
* Use penetration testing to verify threat mitigation.
* Use static code analysis to detect and prevent future vulnerabilities.
* Use code scanning to detect and prevent future vulnerabilities

</details>

### Gebruikte bronnen
https://learn.microsoft.com/nl-nl/azure/well-architected/  en verder


### Ervaren problemen

### Resultaat
